---
layout: post
title:  "Computational Thinking: Drawing Pictures"
date:   2017-04-03
categories: cs,education
mathjax: true
image: true
imagefile: comp-think1-small.png
---

This series is dedicated to introducing foundational notions of computer science and computational mathematics.  I hope it will be useful for individuals trying to learn the discipline as well as teachers and instructors learning to communicate it to students.

---

At Colby, our introductory computer science course was called "Computational Thinking".  Rather than focusing on teaching students how to *program*, the goal of the course is to teach students to develop the *style of thinking and intuition* necessary to program.  Of course this was taught with an introduction to Python in the background.

I took the course in Spring 2013 and served as a lab teaching assistant and tutor for students in the course for five other semesters.  In my experience, a successful student in this course (and future CS courses) is one who learns to translate high level goals and objectives into computational steps, and then those computational steps into a programming language.  The contents of this post are loosely based around the first project assigned to students in Colby's CS151 (Art) course.

---

Fundamentally, computers aren't very smart.  They can do things quickly, but they need really, really, really specific instructions to accomplish that goal.  If I asked "What is 453 times 2421?" A computer could probably do this calculation much faster than you, but instructions like "Go down the hall a bit, take a left, and enter the fourth classroom on your right" are very unspecific.  Even if we consider a robot with wheels that can physically accomplish this goal, it still probably doesn't know what "a bit" means, or how to distinguish classrooms from offices from closets from bathrooms to find the "fourth classroom on the left".  You and I, on the other hand, would probably have no problem following these instructions.

A programming language is just a way of phrasing instructions in a precise way such that a computer can understand and execute it.  Computers, being not-so-smart, follow the directions exactly as given to them.  If we want to calculate 10+15 then multiply it by 4, we should tell the computer to do "(10+15)\*4" and not "10+15\*4", because the computer will follow precisely the familiar PEMDAS order-of-operations.

Let's think of something simple, like instructions for drawing a square on a page.  But let's imagine, instead of knowing what 'square' means, the person holding the pen only understands a limited set of instructions.  She knows how to pick the pen up and put it down, she knows how to draw a line segment of a specified number of units, and she can rotate left or right a certain number of degrees.  How do we ask her to draw a square using these limited instructions?

Well, the instructions to draw a square are:
```
put the pen down
go forward 100 units
turn left 90 degrees
go forward 100 units
turn left 90 degrees
go forward 100 units
turn left 90 degrees
pick the pen up
```

Now, we just have to translate it into a programming language which the computer understands.  Python's drawing package is called ```turtle```, and we can put its instructions somewhere accessible by calling ```import turtle``` at the top of our program.  The above list of instructions, translated into Python looks like:

```python

#import the turtle module
import turtle

#put the pen down
turtle.pendown()
#draw the square
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
#pick the pen up
turtle.penup()

#keep the canvas open
turtle.done()

```


Awesome!  This draws the square.  One thing you might notice is that we wrote ```forward``` and ```left``` four separate times.  It would be nice if we could give the computer the instruction

```
do the following four times:
    go forward 100 units
    turn left 90 degrees
```

The way we do this is with what is called a ```for``` loop.  We can modify our code to look like this, which saves space and makes the code more readable:


```python

#import the turtle module
import turtle

#put the pen down
turtle.pendown()

#do the following four times:
for i in range(4):
    #go forward, turn left
    turtle.forward(100)
    turtle.left(90)

#pick the pen up
turtle.penup()

#keep the canvas open
turtle.done()
```

What if we wanted to draw more than one square?  Rewriting or copy/pasting the same code over and over is both a waste of time and space as well as serves to make the code harder to read.  What if we could do something like the following:

```
Instructions for drawing a square:
    put the pen down
    do the following four times:
        go forward 100 units
        turn left 90 degrees
    pick the pen up
   
go to coordinate (-50,-50)
draw a square

go to coordinate (50,50)
draw a square
```

In Python, this is called "function definition" and is done with the ```def``` keyword.  We can encapsulate the instructions for drawing a square in a separate function, then call that function when we need it.  Our code for drawing two squares now looks like:


```python

#import the turtle module
import turtle

#define a function to draw a square
def draw_square():
    #put the pen down
    turtle.pendown()
    #do the following four times:
    for i in range(4):
        #go forward, turn left
        turtle.forward(100)
        turtle.left(90)
    #pick the pen up
    turtle.penup()

#draw two squares
turtle.penup()
turtle.goto(-50,-50)
draw_square()
turtle.goto(50,50)
draw_square()

#keep the canvas open
turtle.done()

```  



This block of five lines of code is very clear.  It's pretty intuitive what ```draw_square()``` and ```turtle.goto()``` should do, and we defined ```draw_square()``` in a very efficient way.  This is what computational thinking is all about.  We take an idea, translate it into precise steps, and write code which we can read later to recover the original idea.  Consider the following code:


```python

import turtle as yghsz
import math as jjskd
def abc():
    yghzs.pendown()
    for ds in ["dfdks",3,(33,3),' ']:
        yghzs.forward(int(jjskd.pi*(2**5))
        yghzs.left((42%11)*10)
    yghzs.penup()
yghzs.penup()
yghzs.goto(-50,-50)
abc()
yghzs.goto(50,50)
abc()
yghzs.done()

```


You can check that this code does exactly the same thing as before, but it's really hard to understand.  Not only the lack of comments and line spacing, but the choice of names for things doesn't help the reader understand what is supposed to happen.  You can probably discern that it goes to (-50,-50) and does *something* then goes to (50,50) and does that same *something* again, but it's not obvious at all as it was before what is happening.  Making sure we can move back and forth between English (or another human language) ideas and Python (or another programming language) code is a critical piece of being able to think computationally and becoming a good computer scientist and/or programmer.
